Welcome to Db2
After watching this video, you will be able to:
Describe Db2 and its history and features List various Db2 products and deployment options
Describe Db2 on Cloud and its Plans Explain how you can work with Db2 on Cloud
Describe Db2 high availability options Describe Db2 scalability with partitioning
Database 2, or DB2, was first released by IBM in 1983 and was an early example of a
relational database management system. This first release ran on IBM mainframe computers,
but over the years different versions were developed to run on many other platforms,
including OS/2, UNIX, Linux, and Windows. After some time, the product was rewritten
to use the same codebase across the multiple operating systems so that you can easily port
applications accessing Db2 data from one operating system to another. After many iterations of the offering across
many platforms and with enhanced functionality, today Db2 is a whole suite of database management
products including Db2 Database, Db2 Warehouse, Db2 on Cloud, Db2 Warehouse on Cloud, Db2
Big SQL, Db2 Event Store, and Db2 for z/OS. There are many ways to evaluate these products. You can use Db2 Database Community License
for free, with a 100 GB data limit or you can download a free Docker image of Db2 Database. You can also use the free Lite Plan of Db2
on Cloud for development and evaluation purposes on IBM Cloud. Db2 Warehouse Enterprise Edition and Db2 Big
SQL are available in no-cost trial editions, you can use Db2 Warehouse on Cloud for free
for up to 1 GB of data, and you can download a free version of Db2 Event Store Developer
Edition. The Db2 products all use AI-powered functionality
to simplify the management and querying of your data, both on premises and in cloud environments. You can use machine learning algorithms to
improve the efficiency and performance of queries, the column store feature to improve
performance and reduce overheads for analytic workloads by directing queries to specific
columns rather than processing an entire data table, and the data skipping feature to reduce
overheads by automatically avoiding processing data that is not required in a particular
query. The common SQL engine across all the Db2 family
means that you can write a query once and be sure it will work with other products in
the family. This simplifies migration of applications
between products and platforms. And the support for all data types – relational,
structured, and unstructured – means you can access all of your corporate data to make
better business decisions. And the Db2 replication functionality enables
you to implement high availability and disaster recovery solutions. Db2 provides scalability in a number of ways. For short peaks, you can extend on premises
storage and power levels onto hosted cloud deployments and you can independently scale
power and storage in a managed cloud deployment to only use and pay for extra resources when
you need them. Or in Db2 Warehouse, you can use the Database
Partitioning Feature to transparently split data across partitions and servers to maximise
the compute power available and enable massively parallel processing. The Db2 family provides you with a range of
data management products to work with data on premises or in the cloud. Db2 Database is a powerful enterprise-ready
on premises RDBMS optimised for OLTP. It is supported on Linux, UNIX, and Windows
and provides performance, high availability, scalability, and resilience. DB2 Warehouse is an on-premises data warehouse
that provides advanced data analytics, massively parallel processing, and machine learning. Db2 on Cloud is a fully managed, cloud-based,
SQL database which provides similar features to Db2 Database - performance, high availability,
scalability, and resilience. And DB2 Warehouse on Cloud is a fully managed,
elastic, cloud-based data warehouse an on-premises data warehouse that provides similar features
to the on premises Db2 Warehouse. You can deploy both of these cloud-based products
on IBM Cloud and Amazon Web Services. Db2 Big SQL is a SQL-on-Hadoop engine which
provides massively parallel processing and advanced querying functionality. You can use it to query a range of data sources
including Hadoop HDFS and WebHDFS, RDMS, NoSQL, and other object stores. You can integrate it with Cloudera Data Platform
or use as a service on IBM Cloud Pak for Data. And Db2 Event Store is a memory-optimized
database that you can use to ingest and analyze streamed data for event-driven applications. It includes IBM Watson Studio which provides
you with a development environment for machine-learning models. And finally, Db2 for z/OS <VO – “zed oh
ess”, ignoring the slash>, an enterprise data server for IBM Z. It provides a mission critical data solution
with integration for analytics, mobile, and cloud that supports thousands of customers
and millions of users. Cloud Pak for Data is a fully integrated data
and AI platform that you can use to work with and manage all of your data. It runs on Red Hat OpenShift in a container,
so you can deploy it on any private, public, or hybrid cloud. Using Cloud Pak for Data you can connect to
Db2 or any other data source wherever it may be stored, use the Watson Knowledge Catalog
to organise your data, work with a range of analytics services to gain insight on your
data, and use Watson and other services to infuse AI into your systems. Db2 on Cloud is a great way to get started
with Db2. It offers three plans for you: Lite, Standard,
and Enterprise The Lite plan is free and time unlimited,
meaning that you can use it in your projects without worrying about a time-limited trial
period coming to an end. The plan is limited to 200 MB of data and
15 simultaneous connections. The Standard plan provides flexible scaling
of compute capability and storage, as well as built-in three-node high availability clustering. And the Enterprise plan provides you with
a dedicated database instance, again with flexible scaling of compute capability & storage
and built-in three-node high availability clustering. You can deploy Db2 on Cloud on the IBM Cloud
platform or on Amazon Web Services. Once running, you can access your Db2 on Cloud
databases by using the CLPPlus command line interface, the Db2 on Cloud GUI console, or
standard APIs such as ODBC, JDBC, and REST. And you can easily load data from Excel, CSV,
and text files, from Amazon S3 object storage using the GUI console, and you can programmatically
load data from IBM Cloud Object Storage. Db2 provides high availability disaster recovery,
or HADR, functionality to support high availability systems. HADR replicates changes made at a primary
database to up to three standby servers. If the primary database fails for any reason
- hardware, software, or network issues - you can automatically promote one of the standby
databases to be the primary database, redirect client applications to this new primary database,
and continue to replicate to the other standby servers in the group. When the original primary database comes back
online, it can either take the place of a standby server or be promoted back to the
primary position. Db2 Warehouse offers massively parallel processing
and data analytics for BI workloads. At times, you may need to scale the storage
capabilities of your system to meet peak demand or to reduce costs when demand is low. Data in Db2 Warehouse is stored in data nodes. To scale up your storage capacity, you just
add a node to your deployment. The partitions and their workloads are then
automatically rebalanced across the new node setup. Similarly, to scale down, you just remove
a node to return to your original state. In this video, you learned that Db2 on Cloud:
Db2 is a family of products that you can use to work with and manage your data in whatever
way you need You can deploy Db2 across many platforms,
both on premises and in the cloud Cloud Pak for Data includes Db2 and many IBM
tools for data Db2 on Cloud is a fully managed, cloud-based
SQL database that can run on IBM Cloud or AWS
Db2 provides high availability, disaster recovery, and scalability functionality