Welcome to Introduction to
Relational Databases Offerings. After watching this video, you will be able to:
Summarize the history of relational databases List popular commercial and open source databases
Discuss the popularity of open source and commercial databases in the past decade
Discuss the rise in popularity of Cloud databases The first product recognizable as a relational
database was in use during the 1960s: the IBM Sabre Seat Reservation System,
used by American Airlines. In the early 70s, Edgar F. Codd listed
12 rules to define relational databases. In the late 70s, Ingres, developed
at the University of California, Berkeley (UCB), and System R, created
at IBM San Jose were in use. In 1976, Peter P. Chen proposed a new database
model called Entity-Relationship, or ER. The 1980s saw relational database
systems become a commercial success. Db2 became the flagship database product
for IBM, and Structured Query Language, or SQL, became the standard query language.
In the late 80s, a workgroup in IBM designed a distributed relational database architecture
enabling network connected relational databases to cooperate to fulfill SQL requests.
By the early 1990s, new client tools for application development including
Oracle Developer, PowerBuilder, and VB, along with tools for personal productivity, like
ODBC, Excel, and Access were becoming popular. In the late 1990s there was exponential growth
of the database industry. Average desktop users began to use client-server database systems to
access computer systems that contain legacy data. Some of the most popular relational
databases included giants such as Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server, and IBM Db2
And in the 2000s, open source DBs starting to gain mainstream traction and
started replacing many commercial databases. MySQL, PostgreSQL, and other systems brought
open source solutions to the Internet. The 2010s saw the popularity of cloud
databases soar with main players in the industry being Amazon RDS, IBM Db2 on
Cloud, Microsoft SQL Azure, and Oracle Cloud. For many years, the most popular relational
database systems were those from large corporates, which had the resources and
talent to develop sophisticated, fully-featured systems that supported the needs of
industry at that time. These relational databases sold under commercial licenses and are
still popular, with Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server and IBM Db2 the market leaders.
Most large corporates offer both on-premises and cloud-based versions of their products.
In the late 2000s, open source licensing for relational database systems like MySQL,
PostgreSQL, and SQLite surged in popularity. Open source databases operate under a variety
of license types, but all are free to the user. Some examples of popular
open source databases are: MySQL, produced by Oracle and offered under
the General Public License version 2 license. PostgreSQL, produced by the PostgreSQL
Global Development Group and offered under a PostgreSQL License which is
free and open-source, permissive. SQLite, produced by Dwayne Richard Hipp
and offered under a Public Domain license. The popularity of different kinds of database
products is assessed monthly by industry analyst DB Engines. This list shows the ten most popular
relational database systems as at February 2021. Oracle
MySQL Microsoft SQL Server
PostgreSQL IBM Db2
SQLite Microsoft Access
MariaDB Hive
Microsoft Azure SQL Database This DB Engines ranking is based on:
Mentions on websites (Google and Bing) General interest (Google Trends)
Frequency of technical discussions (Stack Overflow and DBA Stack Exchange)
Number of mentions in job offers (Indeed and Simply Hired)
Mentions in LinkedIn profiles Other social media mentions
Over the past decade, there has been a dramatic change in the popularity of commercial versus open
source licensing across all types of software, including relational databases. The popularity of
open source relational databases has risen as the popularity of commercial databases has fallen.
Each now accounts for approximately 50% of the market, with open source slightly ahead at 50.1%.
A 2021 DB Engines study found that open source systems account for 50.1% of the total DB
Engines popularity scores, up from 35.5% in 2013. A cloud database is a database service built and
accessed through a cloud platform. It serves many of the same functions as a traditional database
with the added flexibility of cloud computing. The popularity of cloud databases has
increased steadily over the past decade. The trend is driven by organizations moving
to the Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) model to take advantage of cloud benefits like increased
scalability. Cloud databases are highly scalable enabling organizations to process the vast
amounts of data needed for data analytics. The popularity of cloud databases has
more than doubled in the past decade, and this growth is set to continue.
According to Gartner, Inc. by 2022 75% of all databases will be deployed
or migrated to a cloud platform. Leading cloud databases include Amazon DynamoDB,
Microsoft Azure Cosmos DB, Microsoft Azure SQL DB, Google BigQuery, and Amazon Redshift.
In this video, you learned that: Relational databases are available with
commercial licenses from companies like IBM, Oracle, and Microsoft.
Open source relational databases are offered with a variety of
licenses that make them free to the user. The popularity of open source relational databases
has risen to approximately 50% in the past decade. The popularity of Cloud databases has
more than doubled in the past decade.